---
title: lesson 11 - questions?
---
## vocab
󱤺 mun - moon, night sky object, star

󱤆 ante - different, altered, changed, other

󱥠 sitelen - image, picture, representation, symbol, mark, writing

󱥓 poki - container, bag, bowl, box, cup, cupboard, drawer, vessel

󱥈 pakala - botched, broken, damaged, harmed, messed up

󱤓 jo - to have, carry, contain, hold

󱥥 supa - horizontal surface, thing to put or rest something on

### question word
󱥙 seme - (indicates missing information in a question)

### notes
jo is not the same as english's general to have.

> i have to work \
> ~ mi wile pali

> i have a lot of love for you \
> ~ mi olin mute e sina

> i have eaten \
> ~ mi moku

## lesson
there are two ways to ask yes/no questions, and one way to ask an open-ended one.

### word ala word
to ask yes or no questions, you repeat the first *word* in the predicate in a *word ala word* pattern. if there's a preverb, you repeat the first preverb in a *word ala word* pattern instead.

to answer a question like this you repeat the *word* for yes, and say *ala* or *word ala* for no.

> sina :preverb[wile ala wile] pali \
> ~ do you want to work? \
> wile / ala \
> ~ yes / no

> ona li :predicate[suwi ala suwi] tawa sina \
> ~ is she cute in your opinion? \
> suwi / suwi ala \
> ~ yes / no

### anu seme?
you can also form yes/no questions by appending "anu seme" to the end. (don't worry, lesson 12 will cover the word *anu*)

they are answered the same way as *word ala word* questions, by either repeating the word which would be repeated, or saying (word) ala.

if you're unsure of which word to repeat, you could also just answer with a sentence.

> sina moku anu seme \
> ~ do you eat? \
> mi moku / moku / ala \
> ~ i do eat / yes / no

> ni li ilo kalama sina anu seme \
> ~ is this your instrument? \
> ni li ilo kalama mi / ilo / ala \
> ~ this is my instrument / yes / no

### open-ended questions
open-ended questions are formed by making a normal sentence and putting the word *seme* where the missing information would go.

if you have phrased the question correctly, the responder should be able to replace the word *seme* with the answer.

> sina :predicate[seme] \
> ~ what are you doing? / who are you? \
> mi :predicate[pakala e ijo] / mi :predicate[soweli Tesa] \
> ~ i'm breaking stuff / i'm tess

> :subject[seme] li lon supa \
> ~ what's on the table? \
> :subject[mani ale mi] (li lon supa) \
> ~ all of my money (is on the table)

> soweli Sijala li lon :prep-phrase[seme] \
> ~ where is tiara? \
> ona li lon :prep-phrase[insa pi poki kala] a \
> ~ she is inside the container of fish!

## exercises
### translate from toki pona to english
:exercise[mi kama jo e moku mute kepeken mani]{answer="i acquired lots of food with money" answer2="i bought a lot of food"}

:exercise[sina toki tawa mun tan seme]{answer="why are you talking to the moon?"}

:exercise[sina jo ala jo e sitelen suwi]{answer="do you have cute pictures?"}

:exercise[seme li sona toki pona]{answer="who knows how to speak well?"}

:exercise[ijo mute li ante e nimi ona tan toki pona]{answer="many change their names because of toki pona"}

### translate from english to toki pona
:exercise[what's up? (not literal)]{answer="seme li lon" answer2="sina seme" answer3="seme li kama"}

:exercise[what's up? (literal)]{answer="seme li lon sewi" answer2="sewi li seme"}

:exercise[i wanna be on the bed]{answer="mi wile lon supa lape"}

:exercise[what did you want to say?]{answer="sina wile toki e seme"}