---
title: introduction - about this course
type: lesson
---

hi! im soweli Sika or soweli Lote. i also used to go by soweli Tesa for a while. i love to change my name!! this is my toki pona course. 

i originally made this course many years ago for my girlfriend at the time. i wanted to share my newest special interest with her, but i felt all the courses that existed at the time were too different from my own toki pona, so i decided to make my own course!! 

since i put so much work into it, i decided to put it online for anyone else to use as well, and im always happy to hear my course is helpful to others starting to learn toki pona.

throughout the course, i try my best to do a good compromise between my own personal style, the styles i see most commonly from others, and the style of pu (the official toki pona book). 

however, the most important thing to me is that you not blindly stick with only the style you're taught. toki pona is fun, toki pona is a playground! its up to you to find your own style that makes you the happiest when you're done with this course.
<!-- 
hi! welcome to my toki pona course!

i made this course many years ago to teach my girlfriend at the time toki pona, because i disagree with other courses on many small and big things and i didn't want to have to correct the courses while she was going through them.

however, i put a lot of work into this course, so i figured i may as well also put it out online for anyone else to use!

i tried my best to do a good compromise between my personal style and the style of pu, and i think it should be a good starting point for anyone interested in learning toki pona. ultimately, it's up to you to form your own style after you're done with this course. -->

## notes
- this course will not make you fluent. no course out there will! toki pona may be minimalist, but it's still a complex language to learn. people spend several years before they even start considering themselves fluent, and you will probably be no different. \
however, this course will give you a good understanding of all the important fundamentals of toki pona, so you can then go on to explore the language on your own!
- i think that using the language actively is very important while learning, and i highly recommend joining toki pona communities where you can practice speaking the language and ask questions.
- it's okay to make mistakes - everyone does!
    > 󱥈󱤧󱤖󱤉󱥡󱥝 \
    > pakala li kama e sona sin \
    > ~ mistakes bring forth new knowledge
- if you have any questions or feedback feel free to message me on discord ([comforttiger#0](https://discord.com/users/152843864342790145)) \
really dont be afraid to message me for even the simplest questions!
