---
title: lesson 12 - anu
---
## vocab
󱤋 esun - market, shop, fair, bazaar, business transaction

󱤛 kiwen - hard object, metal, rock, stone

󱥱 utala - battle, challenge, compete against, struggle against

󱤿 nasin - way, custom, doctrine, method, path, road

󱥜 sike - round or circular thing; ball, circle, cycle, sphere, wheel; of one year

### particles
󱤇 anu - (forms an or-conjunction)

## lesson
### anu
*anu* is a conjunction meaning "or"

it adds a new phrase to the current part of speech (subject, predicate, object, preposition), and indicates an and/or relationship between the two (or more) phrases.

### examples
> ona li :predicate[jan] anu :predicate[soweli] \
> ~ they're :predicate[a person] or :predicate[a dog]

> waso li ken tawa lon :prep-phrase[ma] anu :prep-phrase[sewi] \
> ~ birds can move on :prep-phrase[the ground] or in :prep-phrase[the sky]

> :subject[kasi] anu :subject[suwi] li ken moku \
> ~ :subject[plants] or :subject[sweets] can be food

### notes about questions
*anu* doesn't automatically form questions.

one way to use *anu* to ask a question might be to list the possible options using *anu*, and then ask which option the listener agrees with.

> waso anu soweli li ken · seme li pona mute tawa sina \
> ~ do you like birds or cats more? \
> ~ birds or cats are possible. which is really good to you?

another way to ask an either-or question with *anu* is by adding "anu seme" as the final option.

> mi anu ona anu seme li ken tawa lon poka sina \
> ~ can me or him walk beside you?

## exercises
### translate from toki pona to english
:exercise[mi wile esun e kiwen]{answer="i want to buy rocks" answer2="i want to sell rocks"}

:exercise[ijo li wile kama jo e ijo kepeken mani anu utala]{answer="people need to obtain things using money or violence"}

:exercise[sina ken utala e soweli mute anu soweli wawa · sina wile utala e seme]{answer="do you want to fight a lot of animals or a strong animal" answer2=" you can fight many animals or a strong animal. which do you want to fight?"}

### translate from english to toki pona
:exercise[birds draw using rocks or tools]{answer="waso li sitelen kepeken kiwen anu ilo"}

:exercise[you can put this in the box of money or the box of food]{answer="sina ken pana e ni tawa poki mani anu poki moku"}
