content/en/4.modifiers.md, before:

---
title: lesson 3 - modifiers
---

## vocab
󱤨 lili - little, small, short; few; a bit; young

󱤼 mute - many, a lot, more, much, several, very; quantity

󱤂 ala - no, not, zero; nothing

󱥁 ni - that, this

󱥵 wawa - strong, powerful; confident, sure, energetic, intense

󱥶 weka - absent, away, ignored

󱤘 ken - be allowed to, can, may; possible

## lesson
### modifiers
modifiers go after the word they're modifying.

<!-- here i'm using the predicate and subject components for the color highlighting, even though obv theyre not actually for marking the subject and predicate. dont worry about it..... -->
> :subject[soweli] :predicate[lili] \
> ~ :predicate[small] :subject[animal]

to do possessive, you modify the word with a pronoun.

> :subject[soweli] :predicate[lili] :direct-object[mi] \
> ~ :direct-object[my] :predicate[small] :subject[animal]

### note about modifying *mi* or *sina*
keep in mind that if you modify *mi* or *sina*, you need to use *li* afterwards.

> mi mute li wawa \
> ~ we are strong

(remember - number rarely needs to be specified, so this could just be "mi wawa" instead)

### note about context

toki pona is a very context-dependent language. one phrase can mean many different things in many different contexts.

in order to communicate properly, you need to think about and break down what the thing you're talking about means, and how that can be expressed in context.

> jan musi lili \
> ~ young entertainers \
> ~ short clowns \
> ~ a few comedians

since exercises can't really have as much context as real life situations do, the translations you come up with might differ from mine. that's okay!

think for yourself if your translation might make sense in a given context, or feel free to ask me on discord ([comforttiger#0](https://discord.com/users/152843864342790145)), or ask another proficient speaker.

## exercises
### translate from toki pona to english
:exercise[ken mute]{answer="many possibilities"}

:exercise[soweli wawa li lili ala]{answer="the strong animal is not small"}

:exercise[ona li jan ike]{answer="they're a bad person"}

:exercise[weka sina li ike]{answer="i don't like when you're away" answer2="your absence is bad"}

:exercise[ni li pona ala]{answer="this is not good"}

### translate from english to toki pona
:exercise[small animals are really cute!]{answer="soweli lili li suwi mute"}

:exercise[bats are capable]{answer="waso li ken"}

:exercise[the children are gone]{answer="jan lili li weka"}

:exercise[my strength is okay]{answer="wawa mi li pona lili"}

:exercise[lots of people speak well]{answer="jan mute li toki pona"}

:exercise[the children, who are away, are playing nicely]{answer="jan lili weka li musi pona"}

Commit message:

added sitelen pona to the course

content/en/4.modifiers.md, after:

---
title: lesson 3 - modifiers
---

## vocab
󱤨 lili - little, small, short; few; a bit; young

󱤼 mute - many, a lot, more, much, several, very; quantity

󱤂 ala - no, not, zero; nothing

󱥁 ni - that, this

󱥵 wawa - strong, powerful; confident, sure, energetic, intense

󱥶 weka - absent, away, ignored

󱤘 ken - be allowed to, can, may; possible

## lesson
### modifiers
modifiers go after the word they're modifying.

<!-- here i'm using the predicate and subject components for the color highlighting, even though obv theyre not actually marking the subject and predicate here. dont worry about it..... -->
> :subject[󱥢] :predicate[󱤨] \
> :subject[soweli] :predicate[lili] \
> ~ :predicate[small] :subject[animal]

to do possessive, you modify the word with a pronoun.

> :subject[󱥢] :predicate[󱤨] :direct-object[󱤴] \
> :subject[soweli] :predicate[lili] :direct-object[mi] \
> ~ :direct-object[my] :predicate[small] :subject[animal]

in sitelen pona, you can also put the modifier inside or above the word it's modifying.

> 󱥢󱦖󱤨 \
> ~ soweli lili

> 󱥢󱦕󱤨 \
> ~ soweli lili

there's no particular rules to when you should write modifiers one way or another in sitelen pona, just write them the way that looks the best in the moment!

### note about modifying 󱤴mi or 󱥞sina
keep in mind that if you modify :word[󱤴mi] or :word[󱥞sina], you need to use :word[󱤧li] afterwards.

> 󱤴󱤼󱤧󱥵 \
> mi mute li wawa \
> ~ we are strong

(remember - number rarely needs to be specified, so this could just be :word[󱤴󱥵 mi wawa] instead)

### note about context

toki pona is a very context-dependent language. one phrase can mean many different things in many different contexts.

in order to communicate properly, you need to think about and break down what the thing you're talking about means, and how that can be expressed in context.

> 󱤑󱤻󱤨 \
> jan musi lili \
> ~ young entertainers \
> ~ short clowns \
> ~ a few comedians

since exercises can't really have as much context as real life situations do, the translations you come up with might differ from mine. that's okay!

think for yourself if your translation might make sense in a given context, or feel free to ask me on discord ([comforttiger#0](https://discord.com/users/152843864342790145)), or ask another proficient speaker.

## exercises
### translate from toki pona to english
:exercise[ken mute]{answer="many possibilities"}

:exercise[soweli wawa li lili ala]{answer="the strong animal is not small"}

:exercise[ona li jan ike]{answer="they're a bad person"}

:exercise[weka sina li ike]{answer="i don't like when you're away" answer2="your absence is bad"}

:exercise[ni li pona ala]{answer="this is not good"}

### translate from english to toki pona
:exercise[small animals are really cute!]{answer="soweli lili li suwi mute"}

:exercise[bats are capable]{answer="waso li ken"}

:exercise[the children are gone]{answer="jan lili li weka"}

:exercise[my strength is okay]{answer="wawa mi li pona lili"}

:exercise[lots of people speak well]{answer="jan mute li toki pona"}

:exercise[the children, who are away, are playing nicely]{answer="jan lili weka li musi pona"}

### read sitelen pona
:exercise[󱥞󱥢󱦕󱤨]{answer="sina soweli lili" answer2="you're a tiny animal"}

:exercise[󱥴󱤧󱥁󱤂]{answer="waso li ni ala" answer2="the bird isn't doing that"}

:exercise[󱤑󱦖󱥶󱤧󱥵󱤼]{answer="jan weka li wawa mute" answer2="the people who left are really powerful"}

:exercise[󱥬󱦖󱥝󱤧󱤘]{answer="toki sin li ken" answer2="a new speech is possible"}

:exercise[󱥴󱤼󱤧󱤻]{answer="waso mute li musi" answer2="lots of birds are having fun"}
