---
title: lesson 7 - prepositions
---
## vocab
::vocab{expandable}
󱤲 mani
#linku
money, currency; thing of value e.g. gold, investment, livestock
#lipamanka
mani speaks to things used in trade, such as fiat money, livestock, spices, or anything else being framed as a tool of bartering. anything can be mani, but by using mani for it you're throwing most of its other qualities to the side. For example, if I use mani to describe coriander, I am framing its culinary usage as irrelevant. I do not care if it will be cooked with. I only care that it will be used in an exchange.
::

### prepositions
::vocab{expandable}
󱤬 lon
#linku
real, true, existing, present; (preposition) located at, located in
#lipamanka
For many people, lon is core to the philosophy of toki pona. It's a key example that ties together the physical and metaphysical. lon is existence, lon is truth, lon is reality. lon is not only existing at a place, but also existing during a time, or in a context. lon's usage outside of a preposition mostly derives from this meaning of existing.
::

::vocab{expandable}
󱥩 tawa
#linku
motion, e.g. walking, shaking, flight, travel; (preposition) to, for, going to, from the perspective of, for the purpose of
#lipamanka
tawa is motion. tawa frequently has a destination, and when used as a preposition, it marks the word after it as this destination. a destination isn't critical to tawa though; speakers will use tawa for vibrating or shaking in place, or wandering. When tawa is used as a preposition, it marks that which the motion approaches. This can be physical, but metaphysically tawa can mark a recipient, beneficiary, point of perspective, etc.
::

::vocab{expandable}
󱥧 tan
#linku
cause, origin; (preposition) from, because of
#lipamanka
tan is some sort of point of origin. It can be a place or object, like a birthing parent or the source of a river, but it can also be a reason like a thrilling feeling or the fear of being yelled at. this corresponds with tan's use as a preposition, where it MARKS this point of origin, i.e. the word directly after prepositional tan is also some sort of point of origin in the same exact way.
::

::vocab{expandable}
󱥖 sama
#linku
same, similar, alike; (preposition) similar to, same as
#lipamanka
sama can be all qualities of similarities and samenesses. Two siblings are sama because they have a parent in common. two stringed instruments are sama because they both have strings. Two action figures of the same exact character are sama.
::

::vocab{expandable}
󱤙 kepeken
#linku
(preposition) using, with, by means of
#lipamanka
kepeken is using. it is usually used as a preposition and not as a transitive verb, and marks the word after it as the object of usage. For example, "mi kepeken ilo" can be "I use a tool," and "mi pali e tomo kepeken ilo" can mean "I build a house using a tool." when used as a noun, it can refer to a specific instance of using something or usage in general. For example, "kepeken ni ilo sina li ike" "the way you're using the tool is bad." Many speakers consider nasin a better choice for this.
::

## lesson
### prepositions
:word[󱤬 lon], :word[󱥩 tawa], :word[󱥧 tan], :word[󱥖 sama], and :word[󱤙 kepeken] are :preposition[prepositions].

prepositions are used to express specific details about the predicate, like how or where. just like preverbs, prepositions can be negated by the word :word[󱤂 ala]. the preposition is appended to the end of the sentence, followed by a :prep-phrase[phrase].

::example
:subject[subject] 󱤧 ( :predicate[predicate] 󱤉 :direct-object[object]) :preposition[preposition] :prep-phrase[phrase] \
:subject[subject] li ( :predicate[predicate] e :direct-object[object]) :preposition[preposition] :prep-phrase[phrase]
::

::example
󱤴󱥉 :preposition[󱤬] :prep-phrase[󱥭󱤶] \
mi pali :preposition[lon] :prep-phrase[tomo moku]
#translation
i work :preposition[at] :prep-phrase[a restaurant]
::

the preposition can also be the predicate:

::example
󱥆󱤧 :preposition[󱤬] :prep-phrase[󱥭󱤴] \
ona li :preposition[lon] :prep-phrase[tomo mi]
#translation
they :preposition[are at] :prep-phrase[my house]
::

prepositions can be stacked:

::example
󱤴󱤖󱥡 :preposition[󱤬] :prep-phrase[󱥭󱥡] :preposition[󱥖] :prep-phrase[󱥞] \
mi kama sona :preposition[lon] :prep-phrase[tomo sona] :preposition[sama] :prep-phrase[sina]
#translation
i learned :preposition[in] :prep-phrase[school] :preposition[like] :prep-phrase[you]
::

prepositions can also be used as regular words:

::example
󱥩󱥞󱤧󱤻 \
tawa sina li musi
#translation
your movements are amusing
::

### examples
::example
󱤲󱤼󱤧 :preposition[󱤬] :prep-phrase[󱥭󱤲] \
mani mute li :preposition[lon] :prep-phrase[tomo mani]
#translation
there's lots of money :preposition[at] :prep-phrase[the bank]
::

::example
󱤑󱤧 :preposition[󱥩] :prep-phrase[󱥭󱥞] \
jan li :preposition[tawa] :prep-phrase[tomo sina]
#translation
a person goes :preposition[to] :prep-phrase[your house]
::

::example
󱤴󱥉󱤉󱤌󱤼 :preposition[󱤙] :prep-phrase[󱤎] \
mi pali e ijo mute :preposition[kepeken] :prep-phrase[ilo]
#translation
i make lots of things :preposition[with] :prep-phrase[tools]
::

::example
󱤴󱥬󱤉󱥔󱥞 :preposition[󱥧] :prep-phrase[󱥁󱦜󱤴󱥅󱤉󱥞] \
mi toki e pona sina :preposition[tan] :prep-phrase[ni · mi olin e sina]
#translation
i say good things about you :preposition[because] :prep-phrase[i love you]
::

::example
󱤴󱤬󱤉󱥭󱥞 \
mi lon e tomo sina
#translation
i make your house exist
::

## exercises
### translate from toki pona to english
::exercise
mi lukin pana e kasi tawa sina
#answer
i'm trying to give you a flower
::

::exercise
ijo li awen sona e pona sina tan ni · sina awen pana e sona ni tawa ona
#answer
people remember how good you are because you keep reminding them
::

::exercise
mi wile sona e tan
#answer
i wanna know the reasons
::

::exercise
ijo mute li wile e ilo tawa tan ni · tomo pali ona li weka mute
#answer
 a lot of people need a car because their place of work is far away 
::

::exercise
lipu wile li lon tomo sina
#answer
the document of wishes is at your place \
the necessary papers are in your room
::

### translate from english to toki pona
::exercise
i saw someone who looked just like you
#answer
mi lukin e ijo · ona li sama sina tawa lukin
::

::exercise
they wanna give you money
#answer
ona li wile pana e mani tawa sina
::

::exercise
this house needs colourful flowers
#answer
tomo ni li wile e kasi pi kule mute
::

::exercise
people work for bad reasons
#answer
ijo li pali tan ike
::

::exercise
birds can learn a lot of things with books
#answer
waso li ken kama sona e ijo mute kepeken lipu
::

### read sitelen pona
::exercise
󱥷󱥍󱥴󱤍󱤧󱥁󱦜󱥞󱥌󱤉󱤲󱤄󱥞󱥩󱥆
#answer
wile pi waso ike li ni · sina pana e mani ale sina tawa ona \
the villainous bird's demand is that you give it all your money
::

::exercise
󱥆󱤧󱥷󱤂󱥌󱤉󱤎󱥆󱥩󱥞
#answer
ona li wile ala pana e ilo ona tawa sina \
they don't want to lend you their tool
::

::exercise
󱥵󱤴󱤧󱥧󱥅󱥞
#answer
wawa mi li tan olin sina \
my confidence comes from your love
::

::exercise
󱤮󱥞󱤧󱥖󱤮󱥑
#answer
lukin sina li sama lukin pipi \
you eyes look similar to a bug's eyes
::

::exercise
󱤴󱥷󱤉󱤲󱥧󱥬󱥔󱤴
#answer
mi wile e mani tan toki pona mi \
i want to be compensated for the great speech i gave
::