content/en/index.md, before:

---
title: lipu sona mi pi toki pona
language: toki Inli / English # name of language in toki pona / name of language in the language
lang: en # must be the same as the directory's name
author: soweli Tesa # this is the name you'd like to be credited with
authorlink: # something you'd like your name to link to
previous: previous
index: index
next: next
---

<!-- 
note for translators: feel free to change the file names! just make sure to keep the numbers at the start, so they show up in the right order. 
-->

::index-layout

  ::bg-box
  ## lessons
  <!-- this will automatically generate the list of lessons -->
  :lesson-list{:lang="lang"}
  ::

#right-side

  ::bg-box
  ## other languages
  <!-- this will automatically generate the list of languages -->
  :language-list{:lang="lang"}

  <!-- you probably want to remove this link from your translation. -->
  [how to translate this course!](/en/translate) 
  ::

  <br />

  ::bg-box
  ## other resources

  - most definitions come from [lipu Linku](https://linku.la/)
  - [sitelen pona lookup chart](https://tokipona.org/sitelen_pona.html)
  - i looked to these resources when i felt lost:
    - [nasin toki by jan Juli](https://github.com/kilipan/nasin-toki)
    - [lipu pu by jan Sonja](https://tokipona.org/)
  - other good courses:
    - [gregdan's course](https://mun.la/toki-pona/)
    - [devurandom's course](https://lipu-sona.pona.la/)
  ::

<br />

  ::buttons
  :link-button[download pdf]{link="/en/pdf/lipu-sona.pdf"} 
  <!-- feel free to replace this ko-fi link w/ a link to support you. or remove it. or keep it, i dunno. -->
  :link-button[support me on ko-fi]{link="https://ko-fi.com/S6S6IOYYY" img="/imgs/kofi_logo.webp" alt="ko-fi logo"}
  ::

::

Commit message:

added lipamanka's toki pona dictionary, and a changelog, and a clarification

content/en/index.md, after:

---
title: lipu sona mi pi toki pona
language: toki Inli / English # name of language in toki pona / name of language in the language
lang: en # must be the same as the directory's name
author: soweli Tesa # this is the name you'd like to be credited with
authorlink: # something you'd like your name to link to
previous: previous
index: index
next: next
---

<!-- 
note for translators: feel free to change the file names! just make sure to keep the numbers at the start, so they show up in the right order. 
-->

::index-layout

  ::bg-box
  ## lessons
  <!-- this will automatically generate the list of lessons -->
  :lesson-list{:lang="lang"}
  ::

#right-side

  ::bg-box
  ## other languages
  <!-- this will automatically generate the list of languages -->
  :language-list{:lang="lang"}

  <!-- you probably want to remove this link from your translation. -->
  [how to translate this course!](/en/translate) 
  ::

  <br />

  ::bg-box
  ## other resources

  - short definitions are based on [lipu Linku](https://linku.la/)
  - long, in-depth definitions come from [lipamanka's toki pona dictionary](https://lipamanka.gay/essays/dictionary)
  - [sitelen pona lookup chart](https://tokipona.org/sitelen_pona.html)
  - i looked to these resources when i felt lost:
    - [nasin toki by jan Juli](https://github.com/kilipan/nasin-toki)
    - [lipu pu by jan Sonja](https://tokipona.org/)
  - other good courses:
    - [gregdan's course](https://mun.la/toki-pona/)
    - [devurandom's course](https://lipu-sona.pona.la/)
  ::

<br />

  ::buttons
  :link-button[changelog]{link="/en/changelog"}
  :link-button[download pdf]{link="/en/pdf/lipu-sona.pdf"} 
  <!-- feel free to replace this ko-fi link w/ a link to support you. or remove it. or keep it, i dunno. -->
  :link-button[support me on ko-fi]{link="https://ko-fi.com/S6S6IOYYY" img="/imgs/kofi_logo.webp" alt="ko-fi logo"}
  ::

::
