content/en/translate.md, before:

---
title: how to translate this course 
navigation-exclude: true
---

<!-- you don't need to translate this page! -->

## translate
there are a couple of different ways that you can translate this course! pick whichever one seems least intimidating!

### markdown files
you can download a zip file of all the markdown files that make up this course, and edit those, and then send them to me when you're done!

:link-button[download zip file]{link="/zip/lipu-sona.zip"}

### github pull request
[go to this course's github to learn more!](https://github.com/comforttiger/lipu-sona-pi-toki-pona)

### google doc
you can make a copy of [this google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iJc8SWJTMfSQs3vaD0khQ5pfb-v8HduxnoeBjDvRamE/edit?usp=sharing), and follow the instructions at the top!

## contact
to submit translations or inquiries, message me on discord or e-mail me

discord: [comforttiger#0](https://discord.com/users/152843864342790145) \
e-mail: [tiger@comforttiger.space](mailto:tiger@comforttiger.space)

## contributing to a complete translation
if you'd like to contribute to one of the complete translations, you can either submit a github pull request (instructions further up), or download one of these zip files containing the markdown files that make up each translation.

::buttons
:link-button[toki Kanse]{link="/zip/lipu-sona-fr.zip"} 
:link-button[toki Italija]{link="/zip/lipu-sona-it.zip"} 
:link-button[toki Nosiki]{link="/zip/lipu-sona-no.zip"}
::

Commit message:

changed "person" to "being" and also added a japanese translation

content/en/translate.md, after:

---
title: how to translate this course 
navigation-exclude: true
---

<!-- you don't need to translate this page! -->

## translate
there are a couple of different ways that you can translate this course! pick whichever one seems least intimidating!

### markdown files
you can download a zip file of all the markdown files that make up this course, and edit those, and then send them to me when you're done!

:link-button[download zip file]{link="/zip/lipu-sona.zip"}

### github pull request
[go to this course's github to learn more!](https://github.com/comforttiger/lipu-sona-pi-toki-pona)

### google doc
you can make a copy of [this google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iJc8SWJTMfSQs3vaD0khQ5pfb-v8HduxnoeBjDvRamE/edit?usp=sharing), and follow the instructions at the top!

## contact
to submit translations or inquiries, message me on discord or e-mail me

discord: [comforttiger#0](https://discord.com/users/152843864342790145) \
e-mail: [tiger@comforttiger.space](mailto:tiger@comforttiger.space)

## contributing to an incomplete translation
these languages have had translations begun, but the translator who initially started hasn't had the time to complete their translation. if you'd like to help make a translation complete, download its zip file, which contains all the markdown files that make up each translation. when you're done or if you need any help, send me a message on [discord](https://discord.com/users/152843864342790145) or [e-mail](mailto:tiger@comforttiger.space)!

:link-button[toki Nijon]{link="/zip/lipu-sona-jp.zip"}

## contributing to a complete translation
if you'd like to contribute to one of the complete translations, you can either submit a github pull request (instructions further up), or download one of these zip files containing the markdown files that make up each translation.

::buttons
:link-button[toki Kanse]{link="/zip/lipu-sona-fr.zip"} 
:link-button[toki Italija]{link="/zip/lipu-sona-it.zip"} 
:link-button[toki Nosiki]{link="/zip/lipu-sona-no.zip"}
::
